---
layout: post
title: Why?
description: "Why am I starting a blog?"
category: miscellaneous
---

Why am I starting a blog?

From the start, I want to outline my initial goals for this blog. What I want it to become and what I don't want it to become.

One of the guiding principles behind this blog is captured by the quote: 

> "Great minds discuss ideas. Average minds discuss events. Small minds discuss people."

**This blog is designed to discuss ideas.** In as much as I do mention people or events, I want to work backwards to the underlying worldviews and philosophies driving that person or event. I fully expect that this blog will cover numerous topics including computer science, software development, philosophy, and religion. In all of these, I want to dwell in the realm of ideas *and* their implications. The reason for my focus on ideas is three-fold. First, there is nothing like the articulation and communication of an idea to help my own understanding of said idea. For example, in the process of articulating my development process, I will likely find areas I could improve and streamline. Second, I would like to let my ideas see the light of public scrutiny so I can get feedback and improve over time based on the input of others. Third, ideas and thoughtful discussion is going to be most beneficial for visitors to my blog. In my mind, this is one of the biggest differences between a well-written blog and a social media account (which is of very little value in my opinion). It's hard interact with Ralph Waldo Emerson's view of history in 140 or less characters, but it is possible with a blog.

**This blog is designed to ask probing and difficult questions.** Is there any meaning to life? Why should I invest my life honing my programming skills and improving my understanding of the computer science discipline? It's fun, I know, but is this enough to justify a lifetime spent on it? In this blog, I may hold back on a few topics and some answers, but I won't hold back on hard questions. Existential crises are welcomed here.

**This blog is designed to be a honest forum for my thoughts and struggles without being narrowly focused on my own experiences.** How is this possible? I will voice some of my struggles as I grow as a software developer, wrestle with the ethical questions that can come with threat intelligence, and wade through philosophical and theological debates... and I will do all of things because I doubt I am the only one who has ever felt like a fraud of a programmer (although this feeling may be quite true in my case) or wondered why I should spend all of this time programming and hacking. What's the point of all this work? What is the potential of technology? In addressing some of my personal thoughts and struggles, I hope to broaden them out and address the larger problems that many neglect (or, as I suspect, suppress).

**DISCLAIMER: You will likely disagree with at least some of what I write in this blog.** And... that's good for both you and me! One of the, many, unfortunate things that changed with the candidacy and victory of Donald Trump as president of the United States is that it seems many Americans have forgotten how to properly interact with ideas with which we disagree. Donald Trump's response to ideas with which he doesn't agree is to either tweet about it (and again: how much can you really interact with an idea in 140 characters?), discount the idea as 'fake' or 'false' based solely on the motives of the one espousing the idea (this is an under-diagnosed fallacy named [Bulverism](https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Bulverism)), or, perhaps most dangerously, ignore the idea altogether and insult the person or organization that is discussing the idea. What is being forgotten, or so it appears, is the ability to thoughtfully and politely engage with those with whom we disagree. My challenge to you, my kind reader, is that you do not fall into any of these traps and that you are willing to engage thoughtfully in the world of ideas without insulting the person behind them. Additionally, help me to do the same and call me out if I ever attack a person rather than an idea. All ideas are not created equal, but all humans beings are.
